# Contemplating Care: A Quantitative Analysis of Patient Decision-Making Under Uncertainty
### Argha Bandyopadhyay, Polymathic Scholar, The University of Texas at Austin

#### Abstract
Health economists have investigated the effects of health insurance coverage on patients’ decisions to seek care for decades. However, most prior studies rely on a limited understanding of patient care-seeking which neglects when patients decide to seek care as well as the uncertainties in health status and insurance costs which motivate those choices. Therefore, there is currently a gap in the literature preventing simultaneous analyses of health and cost uncertainties along with their respective relations to the timing of patient care decisions. Using a Markov decision process (MDP) approach to simulate the relevant data under parameters consistent with the empirical literature, this work quantifies the extent to which patients delay care given uncertainties in their insurance costs and health status. The relationship between these uncertainties and the timing of patient care-seeking is explored by implementing a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm on this dataset to estimate optimal patient decision-making under varying clinical contexts. This work suggests that contemporary analyses of care-seeking which neglect uncertainty and view care-seeking as a binary yes/no choice rather than a decision made over time mischaracterize patients’ clinical decision-making. Based on these quantitative findings, adjustments to patient education and the transparency of insurance contracts are discussed as possible tools to prevent the adverse health consequences associated with delaying care. Finally, this work emphasizes the future value of simulation-based approaches in health economics to probe questions with limited amounts of empirical data.Health economists have investigated the effects of health insurance coverage on patients’ decisions to seek care for decades. However, most prior studies rely on a limited understanding of patient care-seeking which neglects when patients decide to seek care as well as the uncertainties in health status and insurance costs which motivate those choices. Therefore, there is currently a gap in the literature preventing simultaneous analyses of health and cost uncertainties along with their respective relations to the timing of patient care decisions. Using a Markov decision process (MDP) approach to simulate the relevant data under parameters consistent with the empirical literature, this work quantifies the extent to which patients delay care given uncertainties in their insurance costs and health status. The relationship between these uncertainties and the timing of patient care-seeking is explored by implementing a reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm on this dataset to estimate optimal patient decision-making under varying clinical contexts. This work suggests that contemporary analyses of care-seeking which neglect uncertainty and view care-seeking as a binary yes/no choice rather than a decision made over time mischaracterize patients’ clinical decision-making. Based on these quantitative findings, adjustments to patient education and the transparency of insurance contracts are discussed as possible tools to prevent the adverse health consequences associated with delaying care. Finally, this work emphasizes the future value of simulation-based approaches in health economics to probe questions with limited amounts of empirical data.

#### Full Text
The full thesis associated with this work can be found at: [TSW link]
